Create version-control.qmd (#877)
ubvu/open-handbook: topics/version-control.qmd

You could also use version control software for data or publication-writing, but it is not always as straightforward, for reasons explained below.

### Git

Git is an example of the version control software that allows you to do the activities as described above. It is also the most-used version control software and therefore worthwhile to learn more about (for example, [in this lesson from the Carpentries](https://swcarpentry.github.io/git-novice/index.html)). With Git, you can create new versions of files by creating a 'commit'. You can also go back in time to look at previous versions of files, and even reverse commits if necessary. 

However, Git only works well for plain text files. These are files that end in extensions such as .txt, .md, .csv, .py, .R (there are more examples). It does not work well for other file types, such as .docx, .pdf or .xlsx. This is one of the reasons that Git is not commonly used for writing research publications: many researchers still use a text processor, such as Microsoft Word, for writing publications. Research data may also be saved in a file format for which Git does not work well.

#### Git platforms

> When Git is run on an online platform, it can also be used work remotely and to collaborate on files (and versions). Examples of such platforms are [GitLab](../topics/rdm-tools.qmd#gitlab), GitHub and Bitbucket. This handbook, for example, is run on GitHub. There, editors and contributors can propose changes and keep building on each other's work in a transparent and flexible manner. They can also go back to a previous version if something went wrong.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When Git is run on an online platform, it can also be used to work remotely and to collaborate on files (and versions). Examples of such platforms are [GitLab](../topics/rdm-tools.qmd#gitlab), GitHub and Bitbucket. This handbook, for example, is run on GitHub. There, editors and contributors can propose changes and keep building on each other's work in a transparent and flexible manner. They can also go back to a previous version if something went wrong.
```

- Already referenced earlier on this page, the [Carpentries lesson for Version control with Git](https://swcarpentry.github.io/git-novice/index.html) is a very good first introduction to working locally and remotely with Git.
- This lesson depends on some prerequisite knowledge of working with the Unix Shell. If you haven't worked with the Unix Shell before, you can also get yourself up to date easily by working through the first three episodes of the [Carpentries' Unix Shell lesson](https://swcarpentry.github.io/shell-novice/)
- Coderefinery has some excellent material on working with Git: an [introductory lesson](https://coderefinery.github.io/git-intro/) and a [lesson about working remotely, and collaborating, with Git (using GitHub)](https://coderefinery.github.io/git-collaborative/).
- The [Turing Way materials on version control are also worthwhile to read through](https://book.the-turing-way.org/reproducible-research/vcs/), particularly the guidance in the first three paragraphs of the page about [version control for data](https://book.the-turing-way.org/reproducible-research/vcs/vcs-data/).

> Additionally, the University Library includes material on Git in their Software Carpentry courses. In those courses, learning Git is combined with learning a programming language (Python or R). Would you like to know more about these workshop sessions, when they take place, and how you can attend? Get in touch with the [RDM Support Desk](mailto:rdm@vu.nl).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, VU Amsterdam organises [Software Carpentry courses](/trainings.qmd#software-carpentries), which include material on Git. In those courses, learning Git is combined with learning a programming language (Python or R). Would you like to know more about these workshop sessions, when they take place, and how you can attend? Check out [LibCal](https://libcal.vu.nl/calendar/universitylibrary?cid=7052&t=g&d=0000-00-00&cal=7052&ct=32115&inc=0) for upcoming courses or get in touch with the [RDM Support Desk](mailto:rdm@vu.nl).
```
